A Brief Consecration Ritual for Representations of Enlightened Body, Speech and Mind
by Dodrupchen Jikmé Tenpé Nyima

Begin with refuge and bodhicitta. Then:
rang nyi ké chik gi pal heruké kur gyur
In an instant, I transform into the glorious heruka.
lhakpar népé choga la bar du chöpé lok dren gek kyi rik tamché dir ma khöpar shyen du deng shik
All you obstacle makers and disruptive influences who seek to obstruct this ritual of consecration
do not remain here, but go elsewhere!
Recite the mantra of the four hūṃs.
bendza raksha raksha hung
vajra rakṣa rakṣa hūṃ
teng ok chok tsam tamché dorjéi rawa dang gur khang gi tsam ché par gyur
The space above, below and in all directions is now enclosed within a fence of vajras and a
protective tent.
om maha shunyata jnana penza svabhava atma ko ham
oṃ mahā-śūnyatā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāvātmako ’ham
tongpa nyi kyi ngang lé gyuma tabüi yeshé kyi tsal nang dakpa rabjam ten yöi khorlor chir yang
charwé damtsik gi ten nam chomden dé dorjé chang ku dok ngönpo dorjé dang drilbu dzin ching
longchö dzokpé chö kyi gyenpa shyap dorjéi kyil trung du shyukpé né sum yigé sum gyi
tsenpa lé özer trö omin gyi shying né yeshé sempé tsok bendza samaya dza
Out of the state of emptiness, as the dynamic expression of illusion-like wisdom arises the
infinite purity of the environment and beings manifest as the supports of our samaya in the
form of the transcendent conqueror Vajradhara, blue in colour and holding a vajra and bell.
He is adorned with all the marks of a saṃbhogakāya buddha, and is seated in the vajra
posture. At his three centres are the three syllables oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ, from which there emanate
rays of light to invoke the wisdom deities of the buddha field of Akaniṣṭha. Vajra samaya
jaḥ!
Make offerings with:
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shabta pratitsaya soha
oṃ vajra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
Then offer praise with:
töpar öpa tamché la
With bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
shying dul kun gyi drang nyé kyi
And with the most intense devotion,
lü tüpa yi nam kun tu
We offer homage and prostrations
chok tu dépé chak tsal tö
To all those who are worthy of praise.
dza hung bam ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
dam yé yermé du gyurpé tukka né özer trö wang gi lha rik nga khor ché chen drang
From the heart of the indivisible union of samayasattva and jñānasattva there emanate rays of
light, which invoke the empowerment deities of the five families together with their retinues,
who then bestow empowerment with:
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samayé shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
ku gang drima dak chüi lhakma yar lüpa lé rik ngé chöpen gyi u gyenpar gyur
All impurities of the body are purified. The remaining water gathers to create the crown of
the five families adorning the head.
om tsakshu tsakshu samanta tsakshu bishodhani soha
oṃ cakṣu cakṣu samanta cakṣu viśodhane svāhā
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Three times
gompé lha nam ö du shyuwa lé ten so söi nampar gyur
The visualized deities melt into light and transform their appearance into that of the various
representations [of enlightened body, speech and mind].
The Request to Remain
chok chu na shyukpé sangyé dang chang chub sempa tamché dak la gong su sol
All you buddhas and bodhisattvas who dwell throughout the ten directions, think of us!
ji si namkhé ta dang nyampé semchen tamché mi népé nya ngen lé dépé sa la ma shyak gi bar du
gyalwa nam nya ngen lé mi dawar tenpar shyuk su sol
Until all beings, as infinite as space itself, are brought to the state of perfect nirvāṇa beyond
extremes, may you victorious ones remain here constantly, without passing into nirvāṇa!
khyepar du yang ku sung tuk kyi ten di nam ji si jungwa shyi’i nöpé ma shyik gi bar du tenpar
shyuk su sol
In particular, may you remain here until these representations of enlightened body, speech and
mind are destroyed by the four elements.
tenpar shyuk né kyang dak dang sem chen tamché la chok dang tün mong gi ngö drup ma lü pa tsal
du sol
And, as you remain here, may you grant us and all other beings all the supreme and ordinary
siddhis!
Recite the vowel and consonant mantras and the essence of dependent origination as many times
as possible. Then:
dir ni zuk dang lhen chik tu
Remain here, one with these images and objects,
khorwa si du shyuk né kyang
Until samsara comes to an end;
né mé tsé dang wangchuk dang
Grant us freedom from illness, long life, power and prosperity, and
chok nam lekpar tsal du sol
Make everything supremely auspicious: we pray!
om supratishta bendzayé soha
oṃ supratiṣṭha-vajraye svāhā
To conclude, recite verses of auspiciousness.

In response to a request from Dzamling Wangyal,1 the elder brother of my family, Jikmé Tenpé
Nyima instantly wrote down whatever came to mind.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2007.

Source: 'jigs med bstan pa'i nyi ma. "rten gsum rab tu gnas pa'i cho ga snying por dril ba/"
in rDo grub chen ’jigs med bstan pa’i nyi ma’i gsung ’bum. 7 vols. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs
dpe skrun khang, 2003. TBRC: W25007, vol. 4: 117–119
↑ Khyentse Tulku Dzamling Wangyal (1868-1907), a tulku of Do Khyentse. He was the eldest of
Dodrupchen Rinpoche’s seven younger brothers.