The Rain of Virtue and Goodness
A Short Practice for Consecrating Representations of Enlightened Body, Speech and Mind
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

The Extremely Concise Version
Introduction
This has three parts: preparation, main part and conclusion. For the first, before an authentic
image place the articles of the maṇḍala and the vase, and especially the maṇḍala needed
for the consecration, and different varieties of offering. Arrange them all very beautifully
and with nothing whatsoever missing. Then having recited the practice text of the particular
maṇḍala you are practising, at the end of the mantra recitation, hold the mantra cord,
and visualize the deities very clearly in the Namgyalma vase.
rang gi tukka né ngak kyi trengwa gyü
The mantra mālā emanates from my heart centre,
zung tak la tril té bumpé nang du songwé lha tsok nam kyi tuk gyü kül
Coils around the mantra cord and goes into the vase, invoking the deities’ wisdom minds,
özer tro dü dön nyi dzé
Through the emanation and absorption of rays of light, the two-fold benefit is accomplished,
küi cha tamché né chang sem düdtsi gyün babpé bumpar kangwar gyur
A stream of bodhicitta nectar flows from every part of their enlightened forms and fills the
inside of the vase.
Recite the root mantra followed by the vowels and consonants, essence of dependent origination
and supratiṣṭha mantras as many times as possible. Then make offerings with:
om bendza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé newité shapta pratitsaya soha
oṃ vajra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
And offer praise by saying:
töpar öpa tamché la
With bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
shying dul kun gyi drang nyé kyi
And with the most intense devotion,
lü tüpa yi nam kun tu
We offer homage and prostrations
chö tu depé chak tsal tö
To all those who are worthy of praise.
om ah hung gi dung chö kyi chu chö yön du pulwé bumpé lha ö du shyuwa bum chu dang yermé ro
chik tu gyurpar gyur
Through offering the water of the conch with OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ, the deities of the vase melt into
light and merge inseparably with the water in the vase.
Blessing with the mantra and the mudrā:
om akaro mukham sarwa dharmanam adya nutpannatota om ah hung phat soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmānāṃ ādy-anutpannatvāt oṃ āh hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
3 times
1. Elimination of Obstacles
i. Peaceful
Hold up each of the three tormas and make circles towards the shrine or image.
Recite the following mantra three times:
om sarwa bighanen nama sarwa tathagaté bhyo bisho mukhé bhé sarwa takham utgaté saparana imam
gagana kham grihana idam balingté soha
oṃ sarva vighnān namaḥ saravatathāgatebhyo viśva-mukhebhyaḥ sarvathā-khaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ
gagana-khaṃ gṛhṇa idaṃ baliṃ te svāhā
3 times
ii. Semi-Wrathful
Hold up and make circles with the tinglo (the lamp) and changbu (tsampa dough squeezed between
the fingers) and recite the following mantra:
om sumbhani sumbhani hung grihana grihana hung grihana paya grihana paya hung anaya ho bhagavan
vidyaradzaya khorda hung phat
oṃ sumbhani sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja
krodha hūṃ phaṭ
3 times
iii. Wrathful
a. Invocation
vajra maha shri heruko ham
vajra mahāśrī heruko ‘haṃ
rang nyi ké chik gi dorjé hung dzé trowöi gyalpo jik su rungwé kur gyurpé tralwar om drinpar
ah tukkar hung
Instantaneously I become Vajra Hūṃkāra, awesome and terrifying, king of the wrathful herukas.
At my forehead is a syllable OṂ, at my throat a syllable ĀḤ, and at my heart a syllable
HŪṂ.
hung lé özer tröpé trowöi trin rabjam pak tu mepa bendza samadza
From the syllable HŪṂ rays of light stream out, invoking infinite clouds of wrathful ones. Vajrasamājaḥ!
b. Offering
om bendza kordha radza sapariwara argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé newité shapta pratitsa
soha
oṃ vajrakrodha rāja sa-parivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha
svāhā
c. Praise
hung jikpé hung dra ngé drok shing
Hung! You who proclaim the terrifying ‘Hūṃ!’
gek nam ma lü jom dzepa
And overcome all obstacle makers without exception,
ngö drup ma lü tsolwé lha
Deities who grant us all the siddhis,
gek kyi dra la chak tsal tö
Enemies of the obstructing forces, to you I prostrate and offer homage!
d. Purifying with Subjugating Activity
namo jetsün tsawa dang gyüpar chepé palden lama dampa nam kyi ka denpa dang
Namo! Through the power of the truth of the glorious and noble root and lineage masters,
sangye kyi ka denpa dang
The truth of the buddhas,
chö kyi ka denpa dang
The truth of the Dharma,
gendün gyi ka denpa dang
The truth of the Sangha,
sang ngak dang
The truth of secret mantra,
rig ngak dang
And vidyā mantras,
zung ngak dang
Dhāraṇī mantras,
nyingpo dang
And essence mantras,
chakgya dang
And mudrās,
ting ngé dzin gyi denpa dang
And states of samādhi,
chö nyi nampar dakpé denpa dang
And the truth of the total purity of the nature of phenomena,
chö chen gyu dré luwa mepé denpa dang
And the truth of the infallible law of cause and effect governing all conditioned phenomena,
denpa chenpöi chinlap kyi sé chok dir dorjé dzinpa dak gi sem nampa nyi kyé dé
And through the blessing of great truth, we the vajradharas gathered here, generate two-fold
bodhicitta.
né kab su jikten gyi kham la penpa gya chenpo drubpa dang
More immediately, in order to bring about vast benefit in this world and
tar tuk semchen tamché mi nepé nya ngen lé depé drebu tobpar chawé ché du dewar shekpé ku sung
tuk kyi ten nam la rap tu nepar gyiwa la bar du chö ching
Ultimately, to lead all sentient beings to the result of non-abiding nirvana, may all who would
obstruct the consecration (rabné) of these representations of the sugatas’ enlightened
body, speech and mind,
lak tawé kang su yang rungwé jungpo dukpa chen yok dang khor du chepa nam dir ma nepar shyen
du deng shik
And all you malevolent jungpo demons who seek to bring us harm, together with all your servants
and retinues, remain no longer in this place, but go elsewhere!
kal té mi dro na deshyin shekpa tamché kyi tuk nyi su mepé yeshé lé jungwé trowöi yeshé kyi
dorjé mé rap tu barwa di khyé nam kyi gowo tsalpa gyar gepar gyur ta ré
If you do not depart, then may your heads be split into a hundred parts by the powerfully blazing
vajra fire of wisdom wrath arising from non-dual wisdom, the enlightened mind of all
the tathāgatas.
Recite the mantra:
om sumbhani sumbhani hung grihana grihana hung grihana paya grihana paya hung anayaho bhagawan
vidhyaradzaya hung phat
oṃ sumbhani sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja
hūṃ phaṭ
Together with loud, awe-inspiring music, scatter mustard seeds, offer gugul incense, and expel
the obstructing forces.
2. Cleansing Ritual
At first, perform the cleansing on a mirror in which reflections of the mandala, images containing
ringsel and so on appear.
kang dir chomden dé deshyin shekpa drachompa yang dakpar dzokpé sangyé rigpa dang shyap su denpa
Transcendent, accomplished conquerors, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly and completely enlightened
buddhas who are endowed with insight and worthy of reverence,
dewar shekpa jikten khyenpa
Sugatas, knowers of the entire world,
kyebu dulwé khalo gyurwa
Guides and tamers of beings,
la na mepa lha dang mi nam kyi tönpa sangyé chomden dé sé dang lopmar chepa nam la dak chak
gi yo ché dang denpé go né ku trü dampa solwar gyi o
Unsurpassable ones, teachers of gods and humans, buddha bhagavats, together with your disciples
and heirs, with these material substances we offer you this cleansing of your enlightened
forms!
trü gyi khangpa shintu dri shyimpa
To a bathing chamber filled with soothing scents,1
shel gyi sa shyi sal shying tserwa tar
With brightly sparkling floors of crystal,
rinchen barwé kawa yi ong den
And fine pillars all shimmering with gems,
mu tik ö chak la dré drepa der
Where hang gleaming canopies of pearls,
deshyin shekpa nam dang dé sé la
We invite the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs.
rinchen bumpa mangpo pö kyi chu
We request you: Come and bathe yourselves in scented water,
yi ong lekpar kangwa lu dang ni
Poured from overflowing jugs made of exquisite jewels,
rolmor chepa dumé ku trü sol
All the while accompanied by melody and song.
jitar tampa tsam gyi ni
Just as the gods cleansed your body
lha nam kyi ni trü sol tar
Moments after you took birth,
lha yi chu ni dakpa yi
With the purest water of the gods,
deshyin dak gi trü gyi o
We too, cleanse your body in this way.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Drying with Finest Cloths
dé dak ku la tsungpa mepé gö
Then let us dry you in cloths beyond compare,
tsang la dri rap göpé ku chi o
Immaculate and anointed well with perfumed scent,
om hung tram hrih ah kaya bishodhana yé soha
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ kāya viśodhanaye svāhā
Pour the cleansing water back into the vase and offer it to the actual representations or to
their reflections.
di ni trü chok pal dang den
This is the supreme, most glorious cleansing,
tukjé chu ni la na mé
The water of compassion is unsurpassed,
chin lap yeshé chu yi ni
With the consecrated wisdom water,
chi dö ngö drup tsolwar dzö
Grant us whatever siddhis we desire.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni jinpé rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of generosity,
ser né drima jong dzé ching
Cleanses the stains of stinginess.
tongwa dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of giving,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni tsultrim rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of discipline,
trim chal drima jong dzé ching
Cleanses the stains of misconduct,
tsultrim dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of discipline,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni zöpé rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of patience,
khong tro drima jong dzé ching
Cleanses the stains of aggression,
jampa dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of love,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni tsöndrü rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of diligence,
lelo drima jong dzé ching
Cleanses the stains of laziness,
tsöndrü dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of diligence,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni samten rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of meditation,
nam yeng drima jong dzé ching
Cleanses the stains of distraction,
tingdzin dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of concentration,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
di ni sherab rang shyin chu
This water, with the nature of wisdom,
shé chal drima jong dzé ching
Cleanse the stains of misguided intelligence,
yeshé dri yi lek gö chu
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of wisdom,
trü lek dzé la ku trü sol
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Then:
dé dak ku la tsungpa mepé gö
Then let us dry you in cloths beyond compare,
tsang la dri rap göpé ku chi o
Immaculate and anointed well with perfumed scent.
om hung tram hrih ah kala bishodhana yé soha
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ pañca kāla viśodhanaye svāhā
Dry their forms with cloth, and then anoint their hearts with the five fragrances and recite
the following:
tong sum kun tu dri ngé dang gyur pé
With the most sublime of fragrant perfumes,
dri chok nam kyi tup wang nam kyi ku
That gently permeates throughout a billion worlds,
ser jang tso ma chi dor ché pa tar
We will anoint the bodies of all the buddhas,
ö chak barwa dé dak chukpar gyi
Gleaming brightly, like pure and burnished gold. 2
om bendza ghendhe soha
oṃ vajra ghandhe svāhā
Offering Garments
dé né dé la kha dok lek gyur wé
Then let us dress you finely in the most excellent of garments,
namza shintu dri shyim dampa bul
Lightly scented and dyed in vivid colours. 3
gö zang sap la jampa na tsok dang
We offer clothing made of the finest gentle fabrics,
gyen chok gya trak dak kyang bulwar gyi
And hundreds of the most beautiful adornments. 4
om bendza watrayé pratitsa soha
oṃ vajra vastrāya pratīccha svāhā
Offer burning incense, and if you wish to practise more elaborately you can recite prayers of
auspiciousness.
3. Generation of the Deities
Generate the front visualization for whichever mandala you are practising, or if you wish to
follow this particular meditation:
Purify with:
om bendza amrita kundali hana hana hung phat
oṃ vajrāmṛtakuṇḍali hana hana hūṃ phaṭ
Then purify with:
om sobhawa shuddha sarwa dharma sobhawa shuddho ham
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé ku ten dang chörten tsuk lak khang la sok pa sengé tekpé rin po ché tri natsok
pema nyi da tsekpé teng du om lé khorlo karpo om gyi tsenpa lé nam nang karpo yé khorlo
dang yön drilbu dzinpa
Out of the state of emptiness the representations of enlightened form, stūpas, shrines and so
on appear as a syllable OṂ upon a jewelled throne supported by lions and piled up multi-coloured
lotus, sun and moon seats. From the OṂ appears a white wheel marked with a syllable
OṂ, out of which manifests Vairocana, white in colour, and holding a wheel in his right
hand and a bell in the left.
chenma karmo yé khorlo dang yön dé yuwa chepé drilbu dzinpa dang nyampar jorwa
He is in union with white Locanā who holds a wheel in her right hand and a bell in her left.
Likewise:
lek bam nam maché tekpé rinpoché tri natsok pema dang nyi da tsekpé teng du ah lé pema ah gi
tsenpa lé nangwa tayé marpo yé pema dang yön drilbu dzinpa
The texts appear on a throne supported by peacocks with multi-coloured lotus, sun and moon disc
seats as a syllable maṇḍala out of which manifests a lotus. From the syllable ĀḤ arises
Amitābha, red in colour, holding a lotus in his right hand and a bell in his left.
gö karmo marmo yé pema dang yön dé yuwa chepé drilbu dzinpa dang nyampar jorwa
He is in union with red Pāṇḍaravāsinī who bears a lotus in her right hand and rings a bell with
her left.
chak tsen nam langpö tekpé rinpoché tri natsok pema nyi da tsekpé teng du hung lé dorjé hung
gi tsenpa lé mi kyöpa ngönpo yé dorjé dang yön drilbu dzinpa
The insignia appear on a throne of jewels supported by elephants and multi-coloured lotus, sun
and moon seats as a syllable HŪṂ, out of which manifests a vajra. From the syllable HŪṂ
arises Akṣobhya, blue in colour, and holding a vajra in his right hand and a bell in the
left.
ying chuk ma ngönmo yé dorjé dang yön dé yuwa chepé drilbu dzinpa dang nyampar jorwa
He is in union with blue Dhātviśvarī who holds a vajra in her right hand and a bell with her
left.
tamché kyang shyi shying dzum la tsen pé lang tso raptu gyepa dar gyi namza dang rinpoché gyen
tamché kyi gyen ching özer tayepar trowé dak nyi chen du shyukpa o
All are peaceful and smiling, with all the marks and signs, in the full bloom of youth, wearing
all the silken garments and jewel ornaments, and emanating infinite rays of light.
dé nam kyi chiwor om karpo
At the crown of their heads is a white OṂ,
drinpar ah marpo
At their throats a red ĀḤ,
tukkar hung ngönpo nam kyi tsenpar gyur
And at their hearts a blue HŪṂ.
dak dang ten gyi tukké hung lé özer tröpé yeshé kyi khorlo sam gyi mi khyabpé tsok tamché om
bendza samadza
Rays of light emanate from the HŪṂ at my heart and at the heart of the image and invoke the
wisdom mandalas, beyond the imagination. Om vajra samadza!
4. Invitation
ma lü semchen kun gyi gön gyur ching
Protectors of all sentient beings,
dü dé pung ché mi zé jom dzé lha
Who vanquished all the maras and their armies,
ngö nam ma lü ji shyin khyen gyurpé
You who know all things just as they are,
chomden khor ché né dir shek su sol
Buddhas, together with your retinue, come here, we pray!
ji tar sangyé nam ni ganden né
Just as the Buddha in Tuṣita,
trulpa dampa tok kar lha yi bü
In his emanation as Śvetaketu, the son of the gods,
mi pam gön la gyaltsap wang kur né
Enthroned Lord Maitreya as his regent,
zikpa nam ngé dzam ling kun zik shing
Then considered the whole world in five visions,
lang chen tal kar tap shek lhum shuk tar
And descended in the form of a mighty white elephant to enter the womb,
dorjé rinchen pemé rik chok dang
Buddhas of the supreme families—Vajra, Ratna, Padma,
lé kyi rik dang deshyin shekpé rik
Karma and Tathāgata—
chok chüi gyalwa sé dang chepa nam
In all the ten directions, together with your heirs,
dü dir dak gi depé chen dren na
At this very time, invited here through our devotion,
ten chok di la jönpar dzé du sol
Come now, and enter these supreme representations.
dak dang dro la tuk tsé chir
In your compassion for us and other beings,
nyi kyi dzu trul tu yi ni
Through your miraculous powers,
ji si chöpa dak gyi na
Remain here, we pray,
dé si chomden shyuk su sol
For as long as we continue to make offerings.
Offer seats with:
pema kamala ya tam
padma kamalāyas tvaṃ
And make offerings with:
om vajra pupé dupé aloké gendhé newité shapta pratitsa soha
oṃ vajra puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
5. Invocation and Dissolution of the Jñānasattva into the Samayasattva
om bendza angu sha dza | om bendza pasha hung | om bendza sapota bam | om bendza awe shaya ho
oṃ vajra-aṅkuśa jaḥ | oṃ vajra-pāśa hūṃ | oṃ vajra-sphoṭa baṃ | oṃ vajra-aveśa hoḥ
With this, consider that the wisdom deities are invoked, dissolve into the samayasattvas, are
bound and pleased.
6. Sealing
om palden sangyé ku changwa
Oṃ! Possessors of the glorious buddha form,
dorjé mi ché sum gyi ku
The body of the inseparable three vajras,
deng dir sangyé tamché kyi
Bestow here and now the empowerment
ku yi yik tu wang kur ro
Of the precious body of all the buddhas.
om sarwa tathagata maha kaya vajra sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahākāya vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
ah palden sangyé sung changwa
Āḥ! Possessors of the glorious buddha speech,
dorjé mi ché sum gyi sung
The speech of the inseparable three vajras,
deng dir sangyé tamché kyi
Bestow here and now the empowerment
sung gi yik tu wang kur ro
Of the precious speech of all the buddhas.
om sarwa tathagata maha waka vajra sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahāvāka vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
hung palden sangyé tuk changwa
Hūṃ! Possessors of the glorious buddha mind,
dorjé mi ché sum gyi tuk
The mind of the inseparable three vajras,
deng dir sangyé tamché kyi
Bestow here and now the empowerment
tuk kyi yik tu wang kur ro
Of the precious mind of all the buddhas.
om sarwa tathagata maha tsitta vajra sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahācitta vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
7. Empowerment
rang gi nyingké sa bön lé chung wé özer gyi wang gi lha deshyin shekpa rik nga sé dang chepa
tamché bendza samadza
From the seed syllable at my heart emanate rays of light, invoking the empowerment deities—the
buddhas of the five families, together with their heirs. Vajrasamājaḥ!
With this, they are invited and appear in the space before us.
Make offerings by saying:
om bendza argham padam pupé dupé aloké ghendé newité shapta pratitsa soha
oṃ vajra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
Then recite the following praise:
chö ku namkha shyin du yermé kyang
Although the dharmakāya is indivisible like space,
zuk ku ja tsön shyin du so sor sal
The rūpakāya appears like rainbows, separate and distinct.
tap dang sherab chok la nga nyepé
Sugatas of the five families, masters of supreme means and wisdom,
rik nga dewar shek la chak tsal tö
To you, we prostrate and offer praise!
dorjé chen gyi sangyé la
Just as Vajradhara bestowed empowerment,
drowa kyobpé ché du wang
The source of power and qualities,
yönten jungné ji tar tsal
For the sake of protecting beings,
dé tar di la ang tsal du sol
Grant it here in the just same way, we pray!
shyé solwa tabpé namkha kangwé deshyin shekpa nam kyi wang kur wé gongpa dzé
Through this request of ours, all the tathāgatas who fill the whole of space direct their wisdom
minds and grant empowerment,
yum nam kyi bumpé chu gyun gyi wang kur
The female buddhas grant empowerment with streams of water flowing from vases,
changchup sempa nam kyi tashipé lu yang jö
The bodhisattvas sing songs of auspiciousness,
lhamo nam kyi duk dang baden la sokpa dreng shying rolmöi dra dang chepé chö dzé kyi char bep
Goddesses hoist parasols, banners and the like, and to the strains of sweet music, bring down
a rain of offering substances,
trowo nam kyi gek trepé lé dzepar gyur
And wrathful deities drive away obstructing forces.
tashi kang shyik semchen kun gyi nying la né
The heart of every sentient being is filled with auspiciousness.
kun gyi dak nyi rik kun gyi ni dakpo chok
Embodiment of all, supreme lord of all the buddha families,
ma lü semchen kyé dzé dewa chenpo té
You who generate all sentient beings, embodiment of perfect bliss,
dé ni deng khyö wang kur chok la tashi shok
Let everything be auspicious now for the granting of this empowerment!
And:
ji tar tam pa tsam gyi ni
Just as the gods cleansed your body
lha nam kyi ni trü sol tar
Moments after you took birth,
lha yi chu ni dakpa yi
With the purest water of the gods,
deshyin dak gi wang kur ro
Likewise I now bestow empowerment.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
shyé wang kurwé ku kang drima dak chüi lhakma chiwor khyilwa lé nam nang sok dakpor gyurwé rik
ngé urgyen par gyur
Through this empowerment, from the remainder of the water which purifies the stains of the body
swirling around at the top of the head, Vairocana and so on appear as the crown of the
five buddha families.
om hung tram hrih ah pentsa kula mukuta abhikhentsa mam
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ pañca kūla mukuṭa abhiṣiñca māṃ
With this, the empowerment of the crown is bestowed.
For dressing in armour recite:
om trung
oṃ truṃ
Please the deities by putting your palms together in the vajra mudrā and recite:
om vajra tukte ho
oṃ vajra tuṣye ho
8. Opening the Eyes
Recite the following while performing the gesture for opening the eyes with the golden needle:5
ji tar mik khen gyalpo yi
Just as the king of surgeons,
jikten rap rip salwa tar
Removes the cataracts of the world,
gyalwa nam kyi yeshé chen
Now may the buddhas’ wisdom eyes
semchen dön du yewar cha
Be opened for the benefit of all!
om tsakshu tsakshu samanta tsakshu bishodhané soha
oṃ cakṣu cakṣu samanta cakṣu viśodhane svāhā
yeshé kyi chen nampar dakpa dang den ching semchen gyi dön la zikpa jukpé tu punsum tsokpa la
nga nyepar gyur chik
May you gain the eyes of wisdom, utterly pure, with the power to see for beings' benefit!
9. Transformation of the Representations
The vajra master, holding the vajra in his folded hands, touches the reflection of the image
appearing in the mirror, snaps his fingers symbolically, and says:
om ah hung soha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ svāhā
3 times
kyepé lha yong su gyurpa lé ku sung tuk so söi nang nyen sal la ma drepa yong su dzokpé tu chin
dang denpar gyur
The visualized deities transform completely, and the representations of enlightened body, speech
and mind appear once again, clear and distinct, complete with all powers and blessings.
10. Offering and Praise
chok chu rabjam namkhé kham kangwé
We present offerings that fill the whole of space in all directions—
chö yön shyap sil metok duk pö dang
Drinking water, water to bathe the feet, flowers, incense,
marmé dri chap shyal zé rolmo sok
Lamps, scented water, food, music and the like—
kunzang nam trul chö trin gyatsö chö
Vast ocean-like clouds of offerings, just like those created by Samantabhadra.
om sarwa tathagata argham pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata arghaṃ pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata padam pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata pādyaṃ  pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata pupé pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata puṣpe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata dhupé pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata dhūpe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata aloké pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata āloke pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata gendhé pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata gandhe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata newité pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata naivedye pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
om sarwa tathagata shapta pratitsa pudza megha samudra saparana samayé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata śabda pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
mi wang rinchen na dün di dak ni
To all you buddhas and your heirs—
sangyé sé dang chepa ma lü la
We offer these seven precious emblems of sovereignty,
sham shing yi kyi trul té pulwa yi
Those arranged here, as well as those produced by the mind,
drowa mi zé ter la chöpar shok
Through this, may beings enjoy inexhaustible treasures!
om sapda maha ratna bendza pudzité ah hung
oṃ sapta mahāratna vajra pūjite āḥ hūṃ
With this, offer the seven precious emblems of royalty.
chok dü kun na zuk dra dri dang ro
We imagine all the most perfect sights, sounds, fragrances, tastes and textures,
rekché khyepar punsum tsok pa nam
Throughout the whole of space and time,
mö lö gyalwa sé ché la bul na
And offer them now to the buddhas and their heirs:
shyé shing lamé drup chok tsal du sol
Please accept them and grant us the most supreme accomplishments, we pray!
om pentsa kama guna bendza pudzité ah hung
oṃ pañca kāmaguṇa pūjite āḥ hūṃ
With this, offer the five sensual stimulants, then, with vajra and bell, recite this abbreviated
praise of the Buddha:
chö ku namkha shyin du yermé kyang
Although the dharmakāya is indivisible like space,
zuk ku ja tsön shyin du so sor sal
The rūpakāya appears like rainbows, separate and distinct.
tap dang sherab chok la nga nyepé
Sugatas of the five families, masters of supreme means and wisdom,
rik nga dewar shek la chak tsal tö
To you we prostrate and offer praise!
töpar öpa tamché la
With bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
shying dul kun gyi drang nyé kyi
And with the most intense devotion,
lü tüpa yi nam kun tu
We offer homage and prostrations
chok tu depé chak tsal tö
To all those who are worthy of praise.
11. Prayer
Recite the hundred syllable mantra three times as a preliminary and then:
metok dampa trengwa dampa dang
To every buddha, we make offerings:
silnyen nam dang chukpa duk chok dang
Of the loveliest flowers, of beautiful garlands,
marmé chok dang duk pö dampa yi
Of music and perfumed ointments, the best of parasols,
gyalwa dé dak la ni chöpar gyi
The brightest lamps and finest incense.
namza dampa nam dang dri chok dang
To every buddha, we make offerings:
chema pur ma ri rap nyampa dang
Exquisite garments and the most fragrant scents,
köpa khyepar pakpé chok kun gyi
Powdered incense, heaped as high as Mount Meru,
gyalwa dé dak la ni chöpar gyi
Arranged in perfect symmetry.
dé dak ngakpa mi zé gyatso nam
Saluting them with an endless ocean of praise,
yang kyi yenlak gyatsöi dra kun gyi
With the sounds of an ocean of different melodies
gyalwa kun gyi yönten rap jö ching
We sing of the buddhas’ noble qualities,
dewar shekpa tamché dak gi tö
And praise all those who have gone to perfect bliss.
Offer a garland of flowers to the image. Put your palms together and prostrate. Then recite:
ji si sa chu mé dang ni
Until the destruction at the end of the aeon
lung gi kalpé jik bar du
By earth, water, fire and wind,
semchen kun gyi dön gyi chir
May you, the buddhas, remain here
chomden khyö ni shyukpar dzö
For the sake of all sentient beings.
3 times
dir ni zuk dang lhen chik tu
Remain here, one with these images and objects,
drowé dön du shyuk né kyang
Continually bringing benefit to beings,
né mé tsé dang wangchuk dang
Grant us freedom from illness, long life, power and prosperity, and
chok nam lekpar tsal du sol
Make everything supremely auspicious, we pray!
3 times
chok chu na shyukpé sangyé dang changchup sempa tamché dak la gong su sol
All you buddhas and bodhisattvas who dwell throughout the ten directions, think of us!
ji si namkhé ta dang nyampé semchen tamché mi nepé nya ngen lé depé sa la ma shyak gi bar du
gyalwa nam nya ngen lé mi dawar tenpar shyuk su sol
Until all beings, as infinite as space itself, are brought to the state of perfect nirvana beyond
extremes, may you victorious ones remain here constantly, without passing into nirvāṇa!
khyepar du yang ku sung tuk kyi ten di nam la ji si jungwa shyi’i nöpé ma shyik gi bar du tenpar
shyuk su sol
In particular, may you remain here until these representations of enlightened body, speech and
mind are destroyed by the four elements.
tenpar shyuk né kyang dak dang semchen tamché la chok tün mong gi ngö drup ma lü pa tsal du
sol
And, as you remain here, may you grant us and all other beings all the supreme and ordinary
siddhis!
Scatter flowers blessed by the recitation of:
Mantra of The Essence of Interdependent Origination:
om yé dharma hetu prabhawa hetun teshan tathagato hyawadat teshan tsa yo nirodha ewam wadi mahashramana
soha
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā6
3 times
lar yang dün gyi namkhar chok dü kyi gyalwa sé dang chepa nam namkha kangwé lha dang drang song
den tsik drubpé tsok kyi shipa jöpé lu yang di ri ri drok ching metok mandaré char chenpo
pabpé gelek kyi nangwé sa sum kun du khyabpar chepé möpa dzö
Once again, in the sky before us, there appear all the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs from
throughout the whole of space and time, deities filling the whole of space, and sages
who have the power to proclaim the truth. They sing songs of auspiciousness and bring down
a great rain of mandārava flowers, so that the three worlds are flooded with the light of
virtue and goodness.
punsum tsokpa ngawa ser gyi riwo dra
Possessing every excellence, like a mountain of burnished gold,
jikten sum gyi gönpo drima sum pang pa
Lords of the three worlds who have abandoned the three types of flaw—
sangyé pema nam gyé dap dré chen ngawa
Buddhas, your eyes like lotuses in bloom,
dé ni khyö la dé ring shyi ché tashi shok
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!
dé yi nyewar tenpé chok rap yo mepa
The teachings they impart are sublime and unchanging,
jikten sum na drak shing lha dang mi chöpa
Famed throughout the three worlds, honoured by gods and humans,
chö kyi dampa kyé gu nam la shyi chepa
The sacred Dharma which grants peace to all living beings,
dé ni khyö la dé ring shyi ché tashi shok
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!
dam chö denpa töpé tashi kyi chuk ching
Those who possess the Dharma and are rich with the fortune of learning,
gendün mi dang lha dang lha min yön gyi né
The Sangha, worshipped by humans, gods, and demi-gods,
tsok kyi chok rap ngo tsa shé dang pal gyi shyi
Most supreme of communities, modest, and glorious,
dé ni khyö la dé ring shyi ché tashi shok
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!

gyalwa sé ché sönam tu dak dang
Through the power of the merit of the buddhas and their heirs,
lha nam kun gyi lekpar sampa dang
The noble intentions of all the gods,
sang ngak rik ngak kun gyi tu top dang
The force of secret and vidyā mantras,
denpar mawa nam kyi den tsik gi
And the proclamations of those who speak truth,
sönam riwo shyin du tenpa dang
May our merit be as firm and stable as a mountain,
gyü dzin nyi da shyin du salwa dang
May holders of the lineage appear as clearly as the sun and moon,
nyen drak namkha shyin du khyabpa té
And may our fame and glory spread as far and wide as the sky itself—
sumpo dé kyang deng dir delek shok
May all be virtuous for these three to happen here and now!
gek rik tong trak gyé chu shyiwa dang
May the 80,000 classes of obstructing forces all be pacified,
mi tün nöpé kyen dang dralwa dang
May we be freed from all adversity and harm,
tünpa drup ching punsum tsokpa té
And may all our circumstances be favourable and perfect in every way—
shyipo dé kyang deng dir delek shok
May all be virtuous for these four to happen here and now!
lo gya tub ching tön gya tongwa dang
May we live a hundred years and meet a hundred teachers,
tsé ring né mé deki punsum tsok
May our lives be long and healthy, with every happiness and joy,
tekpa chok la ngepar jungwa té
And may we always have renunciation and the wish to practise the supreme vehicle,
ngapo dé kyang deng dir delek shok
May all be virtuous for these five to happen here and now!
jinpa tong shying tsultrim sungwa dang
Practising generosity, observing discipline,
zöpa gom shying tsöndrü tsompa dang
Cultivating patience, applying diligence,
nyampar jok ching neluk tokpa té
Resting in meditation and realizing reality—
drukpo dé kyang deng dir delek shok
May all be virtuous for these six to happen here and now!

nyinmo delek tsen delek
May the day be well, may the night be well,
nyimé kung yang delek shing
May the mid hours bring happiness too,
nyin tsen tak tu delek pa
May the day and night be always well!
kön chok sum gyi deng dir tsol
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, grant this here and now!
palden lamé deng dir tsol
Glorious masters, grant this here and now!
yidam lha yi deng dir tsol
Yidam deities, grant this here and now!
chökyong sungmé deng dir tsol
Dharma protectors and guardians, grant this here and now!
shyi dak nam kyi deng dir tsol
Local deities, grant this here and now!
jungpo kang dak dir ni lhak gyur tam
May all the spirits gathered in this place,
sa am önté bar nang khö kyang rung
Be it on the earth (or in the water) or in the sky,
kyé gu nam la tak tu jam ché ching
Always show goodwill and kindness to all beings,
nyin dang tsen du chö la chöpar shok
And practise Dharma day and night!
dir ni gyalwa dra gyal den kang gi
The victorious buddhas, conquerors of the enemies,
shin tu denpar sung shing dzün mepa
Only ever utter truths and never what is false.
denpa dé kyang deng dir delek shok
Through this truth, may everything be virtuous and positive here and now!
deng kun jikpa ché lé tar gyur chik
And may we all be freed from every major fear!
deng dir naljorpa dak chak pönlop yön chö khor dang chepa tamché nyima dang dawa za dra chen
gyi nöpa lé drolwa shyin du dü dang pang cha barché mi tünpé chok tamché lé nampar gyal té
shin tu tashi par gyur chik
May everything be auspicious here and now, so that we yogins and yoginīs, and all those around
us, our teachers and our patrons, be freed from all the harms of solar and lunar eclipses,
and liberated from every form of destructive influence, obstacle and adversity!
dzaya dzaya su dzaya
jaya jaya sujaya7

This was composed by the buddhist monk and vidyādhara Mañjughoṣa (Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo).

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2008. Revised 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "rab gnas snying por dril ba dge legs char 'beb/" in gsung
'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol.
16: 225–245
↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, chapter 2, verse 10↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, chapter 2, verse 14↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra,
chapter 2, verse 12 bc↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, chapter 2, verse 13 ab↑ The golden needle
or ‘golden spoon’ (gser thur) referred to here is a surgical implement for the removal of
cataracts.↑ “All dharmas originate from a cause. The Tathāgata has taught this cause. That
which brings the cause to cessation—this too, has been taught by the great śramaṇa.”↑ i.e.,
“Victory, victory, total victory!”